 
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
 
 
ISB – Fostering Innovation  
 
Week 6: Organi sing for Innovation . 
 
 
Video 1: Organising for Innovation: Overview  
Hello. Welcome to Module 6. In this module, I'm going to talk about how do you organise for 
innovation. I'm going to talk a little bit about the design of organisations for innovation or the 
productivity of innovation effort itself. So remember, we've spok en about the imperatives of the CDO 
to balance short -term and long -term objectives of the firm. The idea here that we have repeatedly 
seen is this idea of trying to pursue digital innovation without compromising the short -term profitability 
or the short -term objectives of the firm. And this has a tight link with achieving organisational 
objectives as well. To ensure that ICT is not only applied in the core areas of a business, the idea that 
it is also used to explore adjacencies are transformational project s, and this is how we've been 
speaking about trying to maximise long -term growth without compromising the short -term objectives 
of a firm as well.  
 
To the extent that these companies can actually focus on their core as well as adjacencies, as well as 
transformational projects. This is a way to ensure that companies can achieve both their short -term 
as well as their long -term objectives. But more importantly, this idea of pursuing short -term versus 
long-term objectives should be done in such a way that fir ms can explore the synergies between the 
old and the new ideas as well. Once again, an idea that we've seen in the previous modules itself. 
And implicitly, all of this essentially means that there could be issues with integrating R&D with 
corporate strateg y itself. In the sense that too much of autonomy in terms of exploring adjacencies 
and transformational projects would essentially mean that there might be very, very little synergies 
that can be explored with the old businesses of the firm, and this in ot her way has other problems as 
well. So, if these businesses are completely new and transformational, there's nothing wrong with that 
except that you are probably on the same even keel as maybe the other start -ups, which are the 
sources of creative destruct ion itself. This brings us to this idea of what might be the most optimal 
organisational design for innovation, what is organisational design itself in the first place, and I'm 
going to be talking about some of these issues as we go along.  
 
Video 2: Organisational Design  
So, organisational design fits into these broad areas which are essentially known as microstructures. 
And microstructures are essentially concerned with understanding how organisations work by 
dividing labour between different parts of the organisation and  aggregating them itself. So, how 
organisation works by aggregating the actions of the members towards organisational goals?  There  
 
are different members in an organisation. There could be different managers. There could be 
different lower -level manager s as well. Lower level as in, the lower levels of the hierarchy. How do 
you aggregate these different things that these people do towards a common goal, the common 
organisation goal? This could be the corporate strategy that we are actually talking about. And 
microstructures are also involved in understanding how to make organisations more productive by 
simply thinking about how you divide up these tasks between different members of the organisation.  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
And this idea of microstructures or altering the microstr uctures of organisation broadly fits into an 
area called organisational design. And microstructural approach narrows our focus by abstracting 
away from a variety and the complexity of organisations. So here, just as a practical matter, I'm using 
the word " organisations". I'm not using "firms". I'm not using the word "teams". I'm not using the word 
"divisions". But I'm using "organisations", simply because the idea of organisations can be applied to 
teams. It could be applied to divisions. It could be applie d to firms. It could also be applied to other 
forms of organising businesses as well.  
 
So, I'm going to use the word "organisations"  very loosely to connote and abstract away from the 
variety and the complexity of organisations themselves. I'm just goin g to call this, using the word 
"organisations". And if you want to think about it, you can think about it either in terms of teams, 
either in terms of divisions, or either in terms of other kinds of structures that might exist within your 
respective firms.  And this distills into a few fundamental and universal problems of how businesses or 
any function within the business itself should be organised for optimal performance or for,  in our 
case, maximising innovation productivity. And this is one of the key a spects of managing itself. So, 
one of the key functions of managers is how do you divide up tasks and how do you aggregate them. 
If you look at managing from that perspective, organisational design, which involves dealing with 
microstructures or altering m icrostructures to improve productivity, should be a fundamental aspect of 
managing businesses. And this is one of the reasons why you should know a lot about it, given your 
aspirations of becoming a CX O or a CDO. So, let's talk more about organisational des ign. When we 
spoke about ambidexterity, we spoke a lot about structure. And we spoke about the idea that 
structure is an important lever for organisational design that influences incentives. So what I'm saying 
over here is, while we looked at ambidexterity  from an incentive infrastructure perspective, even the 
idea of structure can be collapsed into this idea of organisational design. But there are other issues 
that we will essentially focus on, which are equally important for the notion of appropriate 
organisational design to improve innovation productivity. And I'm going to talk about some of those in 
this module. And how do we define an organisation? Given that we are pursuing this very broad 
definition of organisation, what is an organisation? And I'm go ing to define an organisation as any 
multi -agent system with a common goal. And like I said, the notion of organisation could apply to 
teams. It could apply to divisions. It could apply to firms. And all of these are examples of 
organisation. In our contex t, digital innovation could require teams, which are one form of thinking 
about organisations. And the key concepts are that organisations are multi -agent. There are many 
people in this organisation, just not an individual or so. So, we're not talking abou t individuals. We are 
talking about a unit which we are calling as organisation, which has many people, which is the reason 
why we are calling them as multi -agent. They comprise of several individuals. But the key aspect is, 
all of these individuals someho w have to work towards a common goal. And this could be our 
corporate strategy. This could be a particular aspect of your innovation strategy itself. Whatever it is, 
we are conceptualising organisations as being multi -agent. They comprise of many individua ls who 
have to work together towards a common objective or a common goal. And that's what we're talking 
about. But if that needs to be done, talking a little bit more about organisation design, if multiple 
agents need to work towards a common goal, there a re, in turn, two other imperatives. There are at 
least a couple of managerial issues that have to be sorted out for these kinds of structures to 
essentially work towards a common goal. One is this idea of the extent of specialisation, division of 
labour. H ow do you divide these different tasks? How do you break them down into sub -tasks and 
assign them to different agents within the organisation? And the second one is essentially the 
opposite of that. Once you have divided these tasks, given the objective of  trying to achieve this 
common goal, how do you integrate them back? The idea of coordination. So, there are these two 
tasks: Specialisation and Coordination. And the notion of micro -design essentially implies that 
several organisational configurations mig ht be possible.  
 
And what we are trying to imply over here is that these design or these configurations essentially 
influence outcome because of moving these two levers that we spoke about, the extent of  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
specialisation and coordination. So, why would thi s be important for innovation? There are several 
articles. Here is one article from McKinsey that talks about why microstructures or organisational 
design, or thinking about micro structures, which is organisational design, might be very important for 
innovation. So this one, for example, says that there's no right way to organise R&D, but a set of core 
design principles can provide organisations with the flexibility in order to outpace their competitors. 
So, what this is essentially saying is that  organis ations need to think about microstructures. And one 
of the reasons why they need to think about microstructure is to have a flexible setup, so much so 
that organisations can actually adapt to different changes in the environment. Once again, this notion 
of adaptability and the importance of adaptability to outpace your competitors come up. And one of 
the ways to do that, this is what this line is saying, one of the ways to do that is by thinking about a 
design that provides flexibility to organisations. Her e's another quote from the same article, which 
talks a little more about digitalisation itself. So, the traditional component -based approach to R&D is 
no longer sensible in an era when digital and electronic systems are thoroughly integrated with 
hardware,  especially in this era of just not software. Maybe IOT, and so on and so forth. Still, many 
companies struggle to shift towards an approach that focuses more on the function the customer 
wants rather than components that make the desired functions work.  
 
So, this once again takes on this view that it's important to be customer centric. But customer -
centricity should not determine how organisations should be structured. In other words, organisation 
should be structured to deliver the function rather than organisation structures being determined by 
what just the customer might actually want. Once again, it talks about the importance of structure or 
microstructures for performing a function, especially the last line. Here is another quote: "Determining 
the right structure for an R&D organisation has never been easy. The division of responsibility is a 
balancing act between project -management organisation and the R&D line organisation." So, I'm just 
going to pause here. There are other things that are said in the same sentence, but I'm going to 
pause here. This specifically talks about the challenges of balancing two things, which is what I'm 
going to talk about as we move along. The idea of trying to balance the division of labour 
specialisation on one hand, a long with the need of coordinating these different sub -tasks towards a 
common goal. So, at least this article says that, or the sentence says that, there is a challenge, in 
terms of being able to balance both sides of the coin that we spoke about just abou t a minute back. 
And here, are a set of winning design principles. In the ideal R&D organisations, responsibilities are 
clearly established. And the interfaces between them among teams are also transparent. So, this 
talks about, "Okay, look. There is somet hing that managers can do to make two things work."  
 
The idea of coordination as well as the division of labour, both sort of work simultaneously. And that's 
the aspect that I'm essentially going to focus about. I'm going to focus on two things. One is, what is 
the trade -off between division of labour and coordination? And how can managers solve this trade -
off? If managers don't solve this trade -off, you're not going to achieve organisational objectives. 
You're not going to be able to achieve innovation p roductivity. You're not going to produce ideas. 
You're probably not going to direct some of these R&D efforts towards corporate strategy. Both of 
these are important. How does a manager essentially achieve it? And if you believe this article, this 
may not be as easy as it sounds. There are, however, a few principles that we can use, so that 
managers can balance the benefits of specialisation, which I will talk about in a little bit, with the ease 
of coordination as well, which is something that I'll also ta lk about in a few minutes. By the way, 
organisational design or organisation design is a billion dollar practice. Here is another example from 
Bain. So, this picture is from Bain. And if you go to any of these big consulting firms, organisational 
design is  a key, a billion dollar practice, precisely because of the trade -off that we spoke about. With 
innovation, the key task is dividing up R&D effort between different agents, between scientists, 
engineers, whoever is indulging in the innovation activity, and  simply also to coordinate them 
according to your strategic needs to maximise innovation performance.  
  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
 
 Video 3: Division of Labour, Coordination Cost and Trade -Offs 
Let me take you through a few of the nuts and bolts of each one of these ideas of specialisation and 
coordination. So,  
 
and I'm also going to touch upon the trade -off between specialisation and coordination itself. So, let 
me first talk about the division of labour. What do you mean by division of labour? What do we mean 
by specialisation? And in this module, I'm going to b e using the terms, division of labour and 
specialisation, interchangeably.  And what I mean by division of labour is this idea of partitioning a 
complex process or a complex task into several different sub -tasks.  This is this idea of chopping it up 
into b its,  chopping it up into smaller sub -tasks. This is what we are talking about. A given number of 
workers can produce far more output using division of labour compared to the same number of 
workers who are all generalists.  So now, I'm beginning to talk ab out the benefit of division of labour. 
Why? Because if a person keeps performing a task repeatedly, that person acquires dexterity from 
learning and that enables the person to produce a larger number of output relative to when the 
person was a generalist. So, that's why we're talking about,  right? What would be a very good 
example? Think about how the honeybees work. So, research suggests that honeybees are 
incredibly specialised. And why are they specialised? Simply because they have a production 
function , which is the idea of producing honey. And they are able to maximise the production of 
honey simply because they are specialised. So, division of labour increases dexterity, which is the 
reason why specialisation increases in higher productivity.  In our context, if a person specialises in a 
particular domain, in the R&D area or digital innovation, that person is going to outperform relative to 
trying to engage in multiple domains in the digital innovation area. So, that's what we are talking 
about. So he re, we have spoken, not only defined what we mean by division of labour, but we've also 
spoken about the benefits that might emanate from the division of labour. So like I said, we will use 
the idea of gains to specialisation as the benefit that arises fro m the division of labour. So, whenever 
I say gains to specialisation, I'm talking about the benefit of division of labour.  The other principle 
that I really want to talk about, other than division of labour, is this idea of coordination costs. So, why 
is it difficult to coordinate? It is because of the presence of coordination costs. There are, believe it or 
not, costs of coordinating activities. Sometimes it involves manager's time. Sometimes it might 
require purchase of things like software. It might eve n include other kinds of monetary investments. 
And this is what we are calling as transaction costs. Every coordination activity involves transaction 
costs, and this is the cost of coordinating activities between different agents. In an innovation setting,  
this is about the costs associated with combining activities of different scientists or R&D personnel, 
each of whom does a specific small tasks. So, let's think about a software project.  A large software 
project,  you divided up into different modules. P eople are implementing different parts of the module; 
people are coding up different parts of the module. But ultimately, if this software needs to become a 
product or something that can actually be deployed within your organisation, these different module s 
will have to be integrated.  And we would have heard about the notion of a project manager. Project 
managers are essentially coordination specialists. So, the cost that the firm or the organisation is 
essentially incurring, in this case, the transaction cost, is the cost of the project manager. It could 
involve salaries. It could involve other kinds of non -monetary costs as well. The trade -off, of course, 
is that how do you balance division of labour and coordination costs. And if you pause  for a minute 
and think about why is there a trade -off? This would point you in this direction that if you chop up 
task, a big task into very, very tiny bits, what you're implicitly doing is you're also increasing the cost 
of coordination. Sure, there are gains to special isation, but too much of division of labour increases 
coordination costs. The question is, how do I balance this trade -off or how do I continue to get gains 
from specialisation while still keeping the coordination costs under check.  And this is where the 
trade -off typically comes from, and tasks similarity between organisations decreases coordination 
costs but also decreases the gains to specialisation. Let's say that you have an organisation in which 
there are these teams, let's say, the sub -units or agen ts within the sub -units that are generalists.  
What would happen? This would obviously minimise coordination costs simply because each one of  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
them might have knowledge of what the other agent is essentially doing. But there may not also be 
gains to special isation simply because each one of these agents are just being a generalist.  So, you 
can see how these trade -offs move in the opposite direction,  these two elements move in the 
opposite directions, which is the reason why I've used the word, trade -off. S o, if you have perfect 
division of labour, so much so that there is essentially no overlap between functions of any two 
agents across an organisation, then there might be a very high level or perfect division of labour. In 
other words, no overlap. But on t he contrary, if you have a generalised setup, there is a high level of 
overlap and perhaps also internal competition because these agents may also compare their work 
and compete with each other. But this also means that there might be this ease of coordina tion when 
there is generalisation, but there is also no gains from specialisation. On the contrary, if people are 
highly specialised, there are tremendous gains from specialisation because of perfect division of 
labour, but coordination is also going to be  a nightmare. So, under this scenario, the manager's 
problem is essentially to figure out when he or she is trying to solve the digital innovation problem, 
solve the digital induced creative destruction problem, what is the optimal division of labour?  
 
In order to understand this question, we need to understand the pros and cons of both of these 
constructs themselves. Pros and cons of division of labour. Pros and cons of some of the after -
effects of overlap. Having people do these multiple tasks, which is  what I'm calling as high overlap 
and internal competition.  If there is high overlap,  it's natural to have some element of internal 
competition. Two agents may be competing with each other either for resources or for their outcomes 
to be used within the organisation. So, we need to understand the pros and cons not only of division 
of labour  but we also need to understand the pros and cons of having high overlap and internal 
competition as well. So, to summarise, the manager's objective function is optima l design, and this 
design is important for ensuring both gains from specialisation and low coordination costs. In 
addition, it's also in the interest of the manager to minimise the ill effects of internal competition. 
When there is too much division of lab our, sure there's high levels of dexterity and gains from 
specialisation as well,  but there is too little internal competition and very high levels of coordination 
costs. So, we have, it's very difficult for project managers to coordinate because there ar e lots of 
these small, tiny projects that needs to be integrated across. For example, that's a problem. And if 
people are perfectly specialised, people are also not competing with each other. Sometimes 
competition brings out the best -of-breed projects,  an d that's also less likely to happen.  
 
So, too much of division of labour, on one side, has these gains from specialisation, but on the other 
side, it has too little internal competition and very high levels of coordination costs. Too little division 
of labour, on the other hand, means that there is minimal learning because people are not doing the 
same task over and over again. There is less to gain from that kind of dexterity.  But there are also 
lower coordination costs as well and high levels of intern al competition.  People are almost fighting 
with each other because there is a high level of overlap between tasks of different agents. So, here is 
some of the gains of division of labour. Greater dexterity. Some of the benefits of division of labour, 
just to summarise, is greater dexterity in tackling problems, learning by doing which helps 
organisations to obtain greater depth of expertise.  So, you are getting deeper and deeper into a 
given technological domain. But on the contrary, it also narrows down the scope of activities, narrows 
ability to absorb other types of information that might be available in other divisions of the firm, other 
organisations of the firm,  and this might increase coordination costs.  So, the important, it becomes, 
the role of the manager, the coordinator, becomes incredibly important. It might also lend itself to 
hyper -specialisation, and this also increases coordination costs. On the contrary, if you say that, 
"Okay, look, I'm just not going to specialise because I'm worried a bout coordination costs",  the other 
way to think about dividing up task is to make everyone generalist;  everybody does everything within 
the organisation. And this creates internal competition because everybody is doing everything, it's 
inevitable for tw o different agents to come up with very, very similar innovations. And at which point, 
as a manager, you'll have to decide which one to use.  And that might create a source of internal 
competition and to the extent that the resources for future projects al so depends on who wins the  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
race in the previous round. This competition for resources might also intensify the level of internal 
competition. So, generalisation increases or creates internal competition, which enables units, teams, 
individuals to be put to ...  This might incentivise them to put in more effort as well.  So,  
 
that might be actually be a benefit as well. So, you could look at it from two perspectives,  it is either 
a problem to be solved or it could also be beneficial as well. And here, I've  taken the view that some 
amount of internal competition might actually be very good simply because it enables the manager or 
the organisation to choose the best -of-the-breed solution.  The other advantage of generalisation is 
the ability to absorb knowled ge, i.e. there are things going on in different parts of the organisation, 
and you know what, I'm just going to be able to understand what the other agent is essentially doing 
within the organisation. And that just means that the ability to or the importan ce of coordination may 
not be that much. Some of the problems of generalisation is that it creates incentives simply because 
two people are competing with each other, and this winner take all attitude of the manager,  
sometimes might become very, very caus tic, so much so that it creates other kinds of political issues 
within the organisation. An internal competition also increases wastage.  So, it's inevitable. If two 
people are producing a solution to the same problem, it's inevitable for one of them to be  wasted. So, 
viewed from that perspective, internal competition also increases the amount of redundancy or 
wastage as well. And these trade -offs essentially make the determination of the optimal division of 
labour. In this trade -off, what is the optimal di vision of labour? A little bit tricky to determine for a 
manager. So, here is an example. So take, for example, a feature, such as lane assistance for 
vehicles. Developing further advances in this function depends on a high level of coordination among 
team s, developing steering systems, brake systems and electrical systems as well. But too often, that 
coordination occurs very late in the cycle, and sometimes, it can be time -consuming. R&D function 
talks about the importance of specialisation as well as coor dination, and it laments about the fact that 
sometimes, this coordination essentially happens so late that it makes the task of coordinating these 
different functions become very, very difficult for a manager. As far as we are concerned, this simply 
highli ghts the importance of division of labour as well as coordination. And in addition, it also brings 
into focus the importance of the manager in enabling both coordination and division of labour. So, 
now that we have understood this trade -off, how do we reso lve this trade -off? 
 
Video 4: How to Resolve Trade -Offs?  
So, now that we understand the trade -off, how do we resolve this trade -off as managers?  
 
So, let's first think about what is it that we want. What happens when you have only specialisation? 
And these outcomes, by each one of these constructs, would essentially tell us what is it that we 
might actually want. For example, take a scenario in whic h there is only specialisation but maybe no 
overlap at all. In that scenario, what would happen is that the specialisation of the organisation would 
essentially create these better outcomes, but it would also increase the transaction costs of 
coordination.  
 
Let's talk about the effects of these constructs one by one. So, let's first talk about the effect of 
specialisation. We argued that specialisation should improve outcomes of organisations simply 
because of the dexterity that emerges from learning. If an organisation essentially had only 
specialisation, we implied that it should create more value, more valuable innovations simply 
because of this learning and dexterity, but it should also create lower amount of wastage. Why? 
Simply because of greater dex terity, they might essentially be producing something of incredible 
amount of value. On the contrary, we talked about these two dual effects of overlap itself. On one 
hand, overlap essentially means that its coarse division of labour between units. It migh t actually be 
able to create better impact simply because there are different people who are essentially working on  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
the problem. This is the effect of competition. Competition gives you better outcomes simply because 
people are competing or agents are esse ntially competing. But this might also increase wastage 
because of higher competition. Although we looked at specialisation in isolation and we spoke about 
it in terms of improving organisational outcomes at the level of the firm' at the level of a differe nt unit 
of aggregation, which might be the firm that might still create suboptimal outcomes simply because 
specialisation might increase the costs of coordination, which is really the reason why the right or the 
most optimal design would essentially be som ething that is a combination of specialisation and 
overlap. Specialisation and overlap increases the impact by more. It is even higher than just pure 
specialisation, but it also reduces the cost of wastage because of the ease of coordination. So, this is 
the right organisational configuration. And for managers who intend to maximise innovation 
productivity, the appropriate organisational design might be one that involves a little bit of 
specialisation and overlap.  
 
Here is a summary of what I essentially spoke about. If you have highly specialised organisations 
with perfect division of labour and no overlap, the coordination costs are immense. On the contrary, if 
you say that look transaction, I want to minimise the transaction costs and I want to create a  
generalised micro structure, that would essentially mean imperfect division of labour, but then there 
is high overlap and internal competition. We know that internal competition, for example, increases 
wastage as well. That could be best of breed outcomes  but there is also increasing wastage. On the 
other hand, there's high levels of specialisation. People are producing better output simply because 
of this increased learning and dexterity. But on the other hand, this may not be high enough, relative 
to whe n people are able to combine their outputs with each other and when they are competing with 
each other. And hence, the optimal division of labour or the structure that managers should aspire to 
create is something which I'm calling as the optimal division of labour is one that has reasonable 
amount of overlap with reasonable amount of specialisation.  
 
So, ideal innovation organisations or experimental organisations have optimal division of labour, one 
which has reasonable amount of overlap and one that is  also reasonably specialised. Here's an 
example of Boeing 787 and all of us who have been following the Boeing 787 would not exactly 
deem that project to be a big blockbuster success, partly because of the outcomes that we hear in 
the market. Also,  partly beca use of the high levels of cost overruns that that project essentially took. 
It took a lot more years than they had planned, and it costed them several billions of dollars more 
than they had initially planned as well. So, why did this happen? Here's an arti cle from Fortune that 
did a post mortem on why that might have essentially happened. And that article actually talks about 
the way by which the 787 project was actually executed. And one of the things that was very, very 
different in how the 787 project wa s actually executed is the fact that there were different vendors out 
to whom the several parts of the project were essentially outsourced. And this article talks about the 
fact that Boeing 787 project was incredibly more specialised or there was high leve ls of division of 
labour relative to what might have actually been optimal. More interestingly, this article also talks 
about the absence of coordination. The minute you have such division of labour, it was important to 
have reasonable levels of coordinati on. And this article essentially talks about the failure of the 
coordination effort, which might have essentially resulted in suboptimal outcomes for Boeing 787 
project. Once again, it emphasises the fact that the optimal R&D organisation should be somethi ng 
that has reasonable amount of specialisation along with reasonable amount of overlaps as well.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
Video 5: How Do Firms Achieve a Reasonable Amount of Specialisation?  
How do firms achieve reasonable amounts of specialization along with the ability to coordinate it or 
overlap? Here is a non -ICT example that of a firm which is one of the market leaders in the 
pharmaceutical industry, Novartis. Novartis spends roughly betw een 15 and 20% of the ir revenues in 
R&D. And their entire business model, if you think about the pharmaceutical industry, the entire 
business model of the pharmaceutical industry depends on their ability to generate blockbusters. 
Blockbuster is any product w ith a revenue of about a billion US Dollars on an annual basis. The 
ability to generate blockbusters is the source of competitive advantage for pharmaceutical firms such 
as Novartis. So, you can't imagine an organization or an industry in which R&D is the source of 
competitive advantage. How does Novartis essentially generate these blockbusters? Because 
Novartis is one of the market leaders, they are successful in creating these blockbusters. How did 
they achieve this? There is one for example in Cambridge.  There's another one in Basel, 
Switzerland. There's one in Horsham, UK. There is one in East Hanover in USA, and one in 
Shanghai, in China. What I want you to notice is that there is division of labor. For example, disease 
areas that are housed in one orga nisation but not the other. If you think about infectious diseases, 
you find that in Cambridge but not maybe elsewhere in the world. Similarly if you are thinking about 
autoimmune diseases, it's there in Basel, Switzerland but not anywhere else in the worl d. Oncology 
for example, seems like it exists in Shanghai but maybe not in every other organisation within 
Novartis. For example, if you're thinking about Basel, Switzerland, gastrointestinal diseases overlaps 
between Basel, Switzerland and Horsham, UK. So , here's an organisation which has reasonable 
amounts of division of labor and reasonable amounts of overlap. This probably is one of the reasons 
why Novartis is able to produce blockbusters, maybe a little bit better than some of their competitors 
in the same industry. And this is an example of how to resolve the trade -off that we spoke about. 
Oncology for example, exists in almost all the divisions except maybe Horsham, UK. And once 
again, something that is symptomatic of reasonable amount of overlaps as well as specialisation. For 
example, Horsham, UK does not do oncology at all. The second thing that I really wanted to talk 
about is how do you resolve? So, one of the key aspects of management, when there is a 
reasonable amount of overlap, is to resolve t his overlap. How do managers essentially resolve these 
overlaps? The idea is to consolidate some of these projects. What do I mean by consolidation? It is 
about the idea of choosing the best of breed and at the same time pacifying the losing unit, division  
within the firm. And here are different scenarios under which consolidation can actually be done. We 
are talking about for example, situations under which technological uncertainty is high. Market 
uncertainty is very high. There are lots of duplicates and  so on and so forth. One of the key aspects 
of managing when there are overlaps is thinking about the situation, and hence thinking about 
whether to choose the best of breed or to have both of them co -exist. Under what conditions should 
these essentially c o-exist with each other? And under what conditions only one of them should be 
chosen? I'm going to leave you with this prescription for getting you to think about how do you 
manage overlaps and how do these different scenarios,  
 
so for example, technolog ical uncertainty, market uncertainty influence, whether you should allow 
these projects to co -exist when there are overlaps or whether they should be consolidated. In which 
case, you're choosing one over the other.  
 
 
Video 6: Organisational Culture  
This other aspect that I wanted to talk about, which is one of the key roles of a top manager, like that 
of a C DO, is about culture. And the point that I would emphasise on to just to give you a sense of 
where I'm going with this is this idea that common c ulture decreases coordination costs. And you 
might wonder why?  But   
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
 
before I start, let me first start by defining what I mean by culture. It means different things to 
different people. But as far as I'm concerned, I'm going to give you a very, very spe cific definition. 
And for me, culture means collective sense making. When there is common culture, managers react 
very, very similarly to a certain kind of stimuli. When there is common culture  that also means 
because managers are reacting very similar to  stimuli, a common culture decreases coordination 
costs because of coherence with the common goal. Everybody is reacting very similarly. There is 
very little discard and that might itself minimise the coordination costs. And that's the logic that I'm 
actua lly going after. So, to the extent, culture means collective sense making; a common culture 
essentially decreases coordination costs. And organisations with stronger common culture create 
more specialised teams.  
 
So, it gives you the bandwidth to create more specialised teams, because think about it,  the jump in 
coordination costs because of specialisation is not very high when there is common culture, relative 
to their not higher rates of specialisation will not result in large increases in coordination  costs, which 
is another reason as to why this commonness in culture could be incredibly important. As an 
organisation, you could benefit more from specialisation. You have this opportunity to increase the 
gains from specialisation provided you have a stro nger common culture. But then, what is strong 
common culture? A strong common culture essentially implies the commonality in two dimensions, 
similarity and focus. Similarity in organisational attributes that are important to employees. So, this is 
a broad agreement on what organisational attributes essentially matter to employees and managers. 
It also means agreement on whether they prefer many attributes  to fewer attributes for the 
organisation. The similarity essentially means that what matters to employ ees and manager?  Is 
there consensus in terms of which kinds of organisational attributes matter to employees? And focus 
essentially means whether a lot of attributes matter or just a few attributes matter. And whether there 
is commonality in that dimensio n as well? A broad agreement in both of these parameters imply that 
people understand each other very, very well and there is a shared vision.  
 
This is what we are calling as common culture. There is a shared vision of what matters to the 
organisation, n ot individually, but as a collective. And this is what decreases coordination costs. And 
this is the decrease in coordination costs  that gives more avenues for organisations to increase or 
benefit more from the gains to specialisation itself. But then, ho w do managers essentially create 
strong cultures? I'm essentially going to talk about two mechanisms, two of perhaps the most 
important mechanisms. One idea is to remove asymmetric communication. What do I mean by 
asymmetric communication?  You want to per mit more of peer -to-peer interaction and remove 
asymmetry in the relationship between two people who are talking to each other.  
 
So, for example, if people, if employees are talking to their managers, that's an example of 
asymmetric communication. And on e way is to remove the asymmetric communication and 
encourage a lot more peer -to-peer interaction. In other words, remove unnecessary hierarchies. If 
you remove unnecessary hierarchies, there is greater amount of socialisation between peers. And 
that essen tially increases collaboration and reduces the cost of coordination. And that, in some 
sense, creates a common culture as people start to talk with each other. People ideas become very 
similar. And that creates these people to somewhat coalesce around a pa rticular kind of culture. And 
that, in turn, decreases the coordination costs. The second way to do this is, of course, to allow 
employees to choose their projects as opposed to being assigned certain kinds of projects. And this 
is incredibly important. We  also alluded to this in the context of corporate entrepreneurship. We 
spoke about the success of organisations such as that of Google or, for example, 3M, because these 
projects essentially emanate from the bottom. And the reason why these firms are succe ssful is also 
because there is this choice of these employees to decide on which kinds of projects to pursue  
 
 
ISB_CDO_FI  
 
implicitly. And this kind of sorting, allowing employees to choose rather than being assigned projects, 
essentially creates this idea of greater am ount of common culture as well. Because people who are 
working on the same set of tasks or same projects essentially have, they tend to share the same 
objective, because it's essentially the merits of that particular project or the idea that attracts them to 
the project. So, sorting is another way to create strong common cultures.  
 
So, what did we speak about in this module? We spoke about the idea or the importance of 
organisational design to achieve a set of innovation outcomes. In particular, we broke that down to 
this idea of why are microstructure s important. What do managers do? Managers essentially 
manage these microstructures. And these micro structures are typically tricky to manage simply 
because of this trade -off between specialisation on one hand, and overlap and internal 
competition/coordination costs on the other. Specialisation requires some amount of overlap for 
coordination  and the need for minimising wastage. But then, what is an ideal organisation design? 
To improve organisational inno vation productivity is something that has reasonable amounts of gains 
to specialisation, as well as something that has reasonable amount of overlap. And this is the kind of 
R&D organisation that could essentially be the most productive in terms of innovati on output. And the 
logic is as follows:  Too much generalisation might create hyper competition and high amounts of 
wastage. But on the contrary, high amounts of specialisation might also increase the coordination 
cost. The right or the optimal kind of R&D  structure essentially is a combination that allows for both 
specialisation as well as coordination. We spoke about a couple of ways to create these kinds of 
organisations. So, we spoke about, for example, the importance of common culture and the 
importanc e of allowing employees to choose projects rather than being assigned projects. These are 
two typical ways to create these common cultures and maybe to make organisations a little more 
specialised and in terms of increasing their innovation outcomes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 