PRIYANKA
Mobile: 9591356108 ; Email: iampriyankawilliams@gmail.com
Profile Summary:
Results-driven Junior Billing Analyst with experience at Iron Mountain Inc., specializing in invoice 
submissions and processing, dispute resolution, and billing operations. Proficient in utilizing SAP, 
Salesforce, ARCVMS, and Oracle to validate and manage invoices. Also experienced as a Telesales 
Executive at Wings Salesforce, consistently surpassing sales targets and maintaining strong client 
relationships. Adept at utilizing Salesforce CRM for lead management and generating new business 
opportunities. Recognized for exceptional sales performance and continuous commitment to 
professional development.
Professional Experience:
Iron Mountain Inc. : Junior Billing Analyst–  ANZ Region
September 2022 to Present
1.  Proficiently handle invoice submissions and einvoice submissions.
2.  Validate and process invoices using SAP, Salesforce, ARCVMS, and Oracle.
3.  Manage daytoday dispute cases, including Credit, Rebills, and manual invoices.
4.  Expertise in creating offline invoices to offset manually, handling Monthly tape sales, 
SITAD Rebate, and prepays.
5.  Prepare manual load files for bulk cases and load files into Oracle for AU and NZ Region.
6.  Create NON–STANDARD invoices for 13 accounts, encompassing both AU and NZ, using
an access database application.
7.  Manage multiple group mailboxes such as Accounts Receivables, Web Invoicing & 
Consolidated mailbox.
8.  Maintain trackers and registers to ensure efficient billing operations.
9.  Responsible for processing both PO & NonPO invoices, credit hold vendor reconciliation, 
discrepancy resolution, and productivity reporting.
10.  Conduct audits for invoice postings, checking for possible duplicates to prevent duplicate 
payments.
11.  Develop root cause analysis to facilitate corrective actions and reduce the number of rebills.
12.  Monitor the billing process, resolve programming errors, missing outputs, and batch errors.
13.  Investigate pricing and tax errors and assist with queries related to unbilled invoices.
14.  Resolve escalated issues related to invoices and accounting to ensure customer satisfaction.
15.  Ensure daily generation and posting of invoices to customer accounts.
Wings Salesforce  : Telesales Executive 
September 2021 to June 2022
1.  Consistently exceeded monthly sales targets by an average of 7%.
2.  Utilized Salesforce CRM to manage and track leads, opportunities, and customer 
interactions, resulting in increased productivity.
3.  Conducted outbound sales calls to generate new business opportunities and follow up on 
inbound leads, successfully converting leads into sales.
4.  Maintained strong client relationships, ensuring high customer satisfaction and repeat 
business.
5.  Collaborated with sales and marketing teams to develop targeted campaigns, resulting in increased lead generation.
Rewards & Recognition:
1.  Award for Highest submission percentage in Wings.
2.  Successfully closed a highvalue deal worth 15Lakhs with a key enterprise client, exceeding 
the quarterly revenue target by 10% in Wings.
3.  Recognized for exceptional sales performance.
4.  Received client's appreciation for continuous and sustained performance in Wings.
5.  Certified for CONSORTIUM – The leading minds in Bishop cotton.
6.  Certified for participating in a workshop on Professional Development conducted by 
Estores in Bishop cotton.
Skills:
• MS Office Tools: Word, Excel, and PowerPoint.
• Oracle.
• Salesforce.
• Billing engine.
• EIS application.
Strengths:
• Adaptable and quick learner.
• Effective communication.
• Organizational skills.
• Positive attitude.
• Selfmotivated.
Education:
•B.Com – Accounts, Business Regulation, Cost Management, Income Tax, Auditing, 
Creativity and Innovation, Ethics, Statistics, Quantitative Analysis for Business Decision, 
PR, and Corporate Communication.  : Bishop Cottons College for Women .
•PUC - Commerce – Stracey Memorial PreUniversity.
•SSLC - School – Seventhday Adventist.
Languages:
English, Telugu, Tamil, Kannada.